                 RSAREF(TM): A Cryptographic Toolkit
                         General Information

                           RSA Laboratories
                            March 21, 1994

                             Version 2.0

This document copyright (C) 1994 RSA Laboratories, a division of RSA
Data Security, Inc. License is granted to reproduce, copy, post, or
distribute in any manner, provided this document is kept intact and
no modifications, deletions, or additions are made.


WHAT IS IT?

The name "RSAREF" means "RSA reference." RSA Laboratories intends
RSAREF to serve as a portable, educational, reference implementation
of cryptography.

RSAREF supports the following algorithms:

     o    RSA encryption and key generation, as defined by RSA
          Laboratories' Public-Key Cryptography Standards (PKCS)

     o    MD2 and MD5 message digests

     o    DES (Data Encryption Standard) in cipher-block chaining mode

     o    Diffie-Hellman key agreement

     o    DESX, RSA Data Security's efficient, secure DES enhancement

     o    Triple-DES, for added security with three DES operations

Version 2.0 offers three other improvements over RSAREF 1.0:
the ability to process messages of arbitrary length in
parts; the option to process either binary data, or data
encoded in printable ASCII; and support for encrypting
messages for more than one recipient.

RSAREF is written in the C programming language as a library
that can be called from an application program. A simple
Internet Privacy-Enhanced Mail (PEM) implementation can be
built directly on top of RSAREF, together with message
parsing and formatting routines and certificate-management
routines. RSAREF is distributed with a demonstration program
that shows how one might build such an implementation.


WHAT YOU CAN (AND CANNOT) DO WITH RSAREF

The RSAREF license agreement gives legal terms and conditions. Here's
the layman's interpretation, for information only and with no legal
weight:

     1.   You can use RSAREF for any purpose, as long as you follow
          the interface described in the RSAREF documentation. You
          can't sell RSAREF or provide a service of any type, where
          you charge in any way. You can use RSAREF in a commercial
          facility.

          For information on commercial licenses of RSAREF-compatible
          products, please contact RSA Data Security. (Special
          arrangements are available for educational institutions and
          non-profit organizations.)

     2.   You can give others RSAREF and programs that interface to
          RSAREF, under the same terms and conditions as your RSAREF
          license.

     3.   You can modify RSAREF as required to port it to other
          operating systems and compilers, or to improve its
          performance, as long as you give a copy of the results to
          RSA Laboratories. Other changes require written consent.

     4.   You can't send RSAREF outside the United States or Canada, or
          give it to anyone who is not a U.S. or Canadian citizen and
          doesn't have a U.S. "green card." (These are U.S. State and
          Commerce Department requirements, because RSA and DES are
          export-controlled technologies.)


HOW TO GET IT

To obtain RSAREF, read the RSAREF license agreement and return a copy
of the following paragraph by electronic mail to
<rsaref-administrator@rsa.com>:

     I acknowledge that I have read the RSAREF Program License
     Agreement and understand and agree to be bound by its terms and
     conditions, including without limitation its restrictions on
     foreign reshipment of the Program and information related to the
     Program. The electronic mail address to which I am requesting
     that the program be transmitted is located in the United States
     of America or Canada and I am a United States citizen, a Canadian
     citizen, or a permanent resident of the United States. The RSAREF
     Program License Agreement is the complete and exclusive agreement
     between RSA Laboratories and me relating to the Program, and
     supersedes any proposal or prior agreement, oral or written, and
     any other communications between RSA Laboratories and me relating
     to the Program.

RSAREF is distributed by electronic mail in UNIX(TM) "uuencoded" TAR
format. When you receive it, store the contents of the message in a
file, and run your operating system's "uudecode" and TAR programs.
For example, suppose you store the contents of your message in the
file 'contents'. You would run the commands:

     uudecode contents             # produces rsaref.tar
     tar xvf rsaref.tar

You can also get a "uuencoded" PKZIP(TM) version of RSAREF. Just ask
for the ZIP file when you return the acknowledgment.

RSAREF includes about 60 files organized into the following
subdirectories:

     doc       documentation
     install   makefiles for various operating systems
     rdemo     demonstration programs and test scripts
     source    source code and include files

RSAREF is also available via anonymous FTP to 'rsa.com'. Along with
RSAREF you can get RIPEM, Mark Riordan's RSAREF-based privacy-enhanced
mail application, and an Emacs command interface to RIPEM. See the
file 'README' in the FTP directory 'rsaref' for more information.


USERS' GROUP

RSA Laboratories maintains the electronic-mail users' group
<rsaref-users@rsa.com> for discussion of RSAREF applications, bug
fixes, etc. To join the users' group, send electronic mail to
<rsaref-users-request@rsa.com>.


REGISTRATION

RSAREF users who register with RSA Laboratories are entitled to free
RSAREF upgrades and bug fixes as soon as they become available and a
50% discount on selected RSA Data Security products. To register,
send your name, address, and telephone number to
<rsaref-registration@rsa.com>.


PUBLIC-KEY CERTIFICATION

RSA Data Security offers public-key certification services conforming
to PEM standards. For more information, please send electronic mail
to <pem-info@rsa.com>.


PKCS: PUBLIC-KEY CRYPTOGRAPHY STANDARDS

To obtain copies of RSA Laboratories' Public-Key Cryptography
Standards (PKCS), send electronic mail to <pkcs-info@rsa.com>.


OTHER QUESTIONS

If you have questions on RSAREF software, licenses, export
restrictions, or other RSA Laboratories offerings, send electronic
mail to <rsaref-administrator@rsa.com>.


AUTHORS

RSAREF is written and maintained by RSA Laboratories with assistance
from RSA Data Security's software engineers. The DES code was written
by Richard Outerbridge, with help from Phil Karn and Dan Hoey. Jim
Hwang of Stanford wrote parts of the arithmetic code under contract
to RSA Laboratories.


ABOUT RSA LABORATORIES

RSA Laboratories is the research and development division of RSA Data
Security, Inc., the company founded by the inventors of the RSA
public-key cryptosystem. RSA Laboratories reviews, designs and
implements secure and efficient cryptosystems of all kinds. Its
clients include government agencies, telecommunications companies,
computer manufacturers, software developers, cable TV broadcasters,
interactive video manufacturers, and satellite broadcast companies,
among others.

RSA Laboratories draws upon the talents of the following people:

Len Adleman, distinguished associate - Ph.D., University of
  California, Berkeley; Henry Salvatori professor of computer
  science at University of Southern California; co-inventor of
  RSA public-key cryptosystem; co-founder of RSA Data Security, Inc.

Taher Elgamal, senior associate - Ph.D., Stanford University;
  inventor of Elgamal public-key cryptosystem based on discrete
  logarithms

Martin Hellman, distinguished associate - Ph.D., Stanford University;
  professor of electrical engineering at Stanford University;
  co-inventor of public-key cryptography, exponential key exchange;
  IEEE fellow; IEEE Centennial Medal recipient

Burt Kaliski, chief scientist - Ph.D., MIT; former visiting assistant
  professor at Rochester Institute of Technology;  editor of Public-Key
  Cryptography Standards; general chair of CRYPTO '91

Cetin Koc, associate - Ph.D., University of California, Santa
  Barbara; assistant professor at Oregon State University
 
Ron Rivest, distinguished associate - Ph.D., Stanford University;
  professor of computer science at MIT; co-inventor of RSA public-key
  cryptosystem; co-founder of RSA Data Security, Inc.; member of
  National Academy of Engineering; director of International
  Association for Cryptologic Research; program co-chair of ASIACRYPT
  '91

Matt Robshaw, research scientist - Ph.D., University of London; member
  of EUROCRYPT '91 organizing committee

RSA Laboratories seeks the talents of other people as well. If you're
interested, please write or call.


ADDRESSES

RSA Laboratories                   RSA Data Security, Inc.
100 Marine Parkway                 100 Marine Parkway
Redwood City, CA  94065            Redwood City, CA  94065

(415) 595-7703                     (415) 595-8782
(415) 595-4126 (fax)               (415) 595-1873 (fax)

PKCS, RSAREF and RSA Laboratories are trademarks of RSA Data
Security, Inc. All other company names and trademarks are not.
